[MUSIC]
In this video, we are going to discuss a latent variable model for
clustering.
So what is clustering?
Imagine that you own a bank, and
you have a bunch of customers,
and each of them has some income and
some debt.
And you want from this data, so
you can represent each of your customers
on a two dimensional plane as a point.
And from this data,
you want to decompose your customers
into three different clusters.
Why?
Well, for example, you want to find
people who spend money on cars and
make some promotions for them,
some car related loan or something.
This can be useful for
different retail companies and banks, and
companies like that.
So find meaningful subset
of customers to work with.
And this is an unsupervised problem,
so we don't have any labels,
we just have raw data, raw x-ses.
Usually clustering is done in a hard way,
so for
each data point we assign it a color.
This data point is orange, so
it belongs to the orange cluster and
this one is blue.
Sometimes, people do soft clustering.
So instead of assigning each
data point a particular cluster,
we will assign each data point a
probability distribution over clusters.
So for example, the orange points on the
top of this picture are certainly orange.
And they have a probability
distribution like almost 100%
to belong to their orange cluster and
almost 0% to belong to the rest.
But the points on the border between
orange and blue, they are kind of not settled.
They have for example, 40% probability
to belong to the blue cluster, and
60% probability to belong to
the orange cluster, and 0% to the green.
And we don't know which cluster
at this point actually belong to.
So instead of just assigning each data
point a particular cluster, we assume that
each data point belongs to every cluster,
but with some different probabilities.
And to build a clustering
methods with this property,
we will treat everything
probabilistically.
Why can we want that?
Well, there are several reasons.
First of all, we may want to again
handle missing data naturally.
And another reason,
that we may want to consider clustering
in probabilistic way,
is to tune hyperparamters.
So usually, then you want to tune
hyperparameters, you do a plot like this.
You consider a bunch of different values,
for
example, for
the hyperparameter "number of clusters".
So on the previous image,
we had free clusters, but
we can try some different amount like 5 or
4.
And for each of these
particular values of number of
clusters we may train
our clustering model.
Which is called GMM and
we'll discuss it later in details.
So we're going to plot the training
performance here like on the blue line and
here I'm plotting the log likelihood,
so the higher the better.
And we can see that whenever we
increase the number of clusters,
the actually performance in
the training set improves.
Which kind of the usual
thing with hyperparameters.
The more clusters you have, the model
thinks its better, but it's actually not.
So, for example, if you put one cluster
per each data point, the model loss
will be optimal, but it's not a meaningful
solution to the problem at all.
So if you consider the validation
performance of your model,
then it increases, then you start
to increase a number of clusters,
then it stagnates somehow and
then it starts to decrease.
And this is the usual picture for
tuning hyperparameters.
You tune a bunch of models and
you chose the one that performs to
the best in the validation set.
So this was probabilistic model for
clustering, but
it turns out that you cann't do this
thing for hard assignment clustering.
Well, at least it's not
obvious how to do it.
So if you train one of the popular
hard clustering algorithmic k-means,
it will think that the more
clusters you have, the better,
both in training and on validation loss.
So it doesn't have any meaningful
way to understand which number
of clusters do we want judging by
the performance on the validation set.
The probabilistic way of dealing
with clustering is also not ideal.
So for example here, we're not sure
whether we want 20 clusters or
60 or 80, but it gives at least something,
you have some boundaries
On what is the reasonable value
from this hyperparmeter.
So this was the first reason why we may
want to consider probabilistic
approach to clustering.
And the second one is that we may want
to build a generative model of our data.
So if we treat everything
probabilistically,
we may sample new data points
from our model of the data.
And in the case of customers, it will mean
sample new points on the 2-dimensional grid,
that look like the points we used
to have in the training set.
And if you're points are, for
example, images of celebrity faces,
then sampling new images from
the same probability distribution
means generating fake celebrities and
their images from scratch.
And this is kind of a fun application of
building probabilistic model for data.
So to summarize, we will want to build
a probabilistic model for clustering.
And this may help us in two ways.
First of all,
it may allow us to tune hyper parameters.
And it may give us a generative
model of the data.
So in the next video, we'll build
a latent variable model for clustering.
[MUSIC]